A couple of these faculty crying because they just didn't feel they were being successful.
Were the students ever mean to the minority?
Kind of, yeah.
Mean not knowing it.
Mean in the sense also that
A lot of them didn't know what they were doing.
The whole idea that isn't it great that this black faculty member can be a graduate student or be a faculty member, which put them above them, you know, in a sense.
But it was not, you give me the impression, it was not
any deliberate attempt to be mean or rude to the person?
No, we never had anybody that was for phone calls or threats or things like that that I knew of.
But I think if you were to talk with the faculty, the minority faculty, they would all say that they were treated very well.
They had problems that are the natural, the kind of problems of worrying that someone thought they were hired because they were a minority.
I remember having this conversation one time with By Flores.
He said, I don't want to be viewed as the token minority here.
I want people to know that I've been hired because of my qualifications.
She ended up, you know, she came here with a doctorate from the University of Nebraska.
She taught over at the cooperative center over in Sam Houston, and I found that she was most effective with teachers as well as working with university people.
She got the bilingual program started here because she took all these linguists
who thought that everybody who was going to teach bilingual education needed to have a degree in linguistics.
The way she handled them was she invited them to lunch with some classroom teachers.
Have you ever met her, Vi Flores?
What's your first name?
Vi.
V-I-E?
V-I.
She has this wonderful personality, and she's smart in terms of the politics.
So she invites these key, I forgot the guy's name in linguistics, head of the Department of Linguistics.
She got him on her side, and she had him meet with the teachers and had the teachers describe to them what they do in bilingual ed classes and the whole notion of transitioning them into the English.
And within two years, she had a bilingual ed program full-blown here.
And then we had a master's program that was developed, and we created a bilingual education center during the time she was here.
All right.
Major frustrations as the things that didn't work out?
I tell you, the frustrations were primarily with the politics, with the legislature.
And those were, you know, challenges that every other dean of education in the United States was facing at that time as well.
You remember, there was a period there where we were talking about doing away with colleges of education.
Do you, looking back,
Have you thought of some things that you could have done differently that would have worked better?
Yeah, I think you always can do things differently.
I never was satisfied with the way we handled the vocational industrial education area.
See, we didn't have the same arrangement there as we had with agriculture.
See, they didn't stay in industrial distribution.
They came into the College of Ed.
And so our connections with industrial distribution were not the same way that the Ag Ed people related to the Agricultural College.
And that's a tough one for almost every land grant.
As you know, every land grant university has that connection.
You have similar problems sometimes with some of the departments in liberal arts and science.
But that area, I was never totally
satisfied with the way we handled that.
I thought some of the faculty there got a short end of the deal when we did some reorganization and things like this.
Where do you think then, ten years ago and now, where does Texas A&M's program in education, where does it justifiably rate?
I think it depends upon the program area.
Where have we been?
I think probably in the areas of special education.
We've always had national leadership in that area.
People, when you go to Washington, they point out this program, particularly the program in the doctoral area where we prepare more minority Hispanic faculty than all the rest of the institutions in the country do.
Of course, that's because of the pool here in Texas, part of it.
But it's because we also have been committed to this.
And so we're graduating more PhDs in Ed Psych who are Hispanic than I think our programs in teacher ed, particularly in some of the elementary ed areas.
We've always had people seeking our graduates.
Math and science, you know, we've had times when it's been kind of like this.
It's hard to keep the commitment sometimes of people in the disciplines to teacher ed.
So a lot changes when a particular, like Janie Shelock and her husband have always been in math, and Dachwala was in the College of Ed.
Even though they were in different colleges, it was like they were on the same page.
But we haven't always had that in other, within the arts and sciences, to make the preparation of teachers your primary focus isn't oftentimes rewarded like it would be.
They're rewarded for what they do in terms of majors or their books that they write and things like that.
Is there any program that we ought, now we're looking forward, is there any program in education that A&M ought to add to?
I think this whole area that I was talking to you about earlier, which is the whole development of interprofessional training
where we prepare our teachers to work closely with other professions that serve the same families.
Not necessarily as a major, but this is a program we've already started with special education, where they do a leadership program in special ed, and take a minor in interprofessional, interagency collaboration.
And what I think we could do is begin to prepare some people who not only had a specialty in their field, but also were the kind of people who connect these professions.
Because so many of the policies today
that are being developed cut across these areas.
In fact, states now are being organized.
Like Minnesota, for instance, just created a Secretary of Child and Family Programs.
He meets twice a month with the commissioners of education, health, social work, and in their five-year planning,
They not only have what their own agency's going to do, but they have a section on what the agency's going to do in relationship to the other
agencies that serve families.
So if you're dealing with a problem like drugs, drug education, and you got money coming from criminal justice and money coming from health and money coming from education, you put it all together, you blend the funds, you can come up with a comprehensive package rather than each unit trying to do it alone.
And I think we could become an institution
that could prepare leaders who could be these community leaders, not just education leaders.
Are there any programs that have been traditional here and other places that we ought to prepare for their phasing out?
I think changing significant.
I think we really need to do more with early childhood.
than we've done in the past.
We've started primarily with kindergarten and first grade, but we really don't have programs for early childhood.
I think in that respect we need to work more closely with community colleges.
What we might end up doing is being the trainers of the trainers in those other settings.
It would be natural for them to look at us to do this.
Are there annual rankings of colleges of education?
Yes, and they rank them by program.
Our Department of Education Administration, which I think within the Department of Education Administration also we've done some tremendous things with outreach and working with minorities.
Our program down in San Antonio, which we've had particularly through Steve Stock's efforts,
is one of the reasons why we have been listed as one of the institutions that's done the most in terms of serving minorities.
But our minorities, oftentimes,
situated in San Antonio.
We have classrooms down there at the Hemisphere Center.
In fact, I'm going down there on Thursday nights, Friday nights.
I go down Friday night and then stay Saturday from 9 to 3, 5 to 8 on Friday night, and have a cohort there.
But it's because we've been willing to go off campus and go down there.
Now, he said something like 90 doctoral students.
that he himself has advised down there.
And then he gets the rest of the faculty to go down there and offer courses.
But most of the students in those classes are Hispanic.
Is that program highly ranked?
Highly ranked, and the Ed admin department is among the top 20 in the country.
Would we be in the top?
25 or 50 in other areas?
Special ed, I think.
Our teacher ed is getting there.
We've had a lot of changes in teacher ed leadership over the years.
But we are part of the good lad
national studies.
We helped A&M as a system get this one of 12 grants in the country, not only to prepare
people and recruit teachers here, but all the other colleges in the system, the College of Education's efforts and that was key to the whole thing.
It's one of twelve programs in the country funded by the Office of Educational Research.
So the programs in teacher ed are continuing to get identified nationally as being outstanding programs.
It's making believe that all the people that you have worked with since you got here, they were all available.
To which ones would you want to give your special appreciation most?
I'm not going to ask you the negative.
Yeah.
Particularly, what about the office staff?
Who were they, the key office staff?
Peggy Ritchie was my associate.
Make believe I don't know Peggy Ritchie.
You know Peggy.
A tremendous person.
Helped me understand the culture.
You know, knew the history.
of the institution.
The other person, of course, that I think has just not only been a key leader in the college but in the university as well is Brian Cole.
Every time they need somebody to do a tough job, they get Brian, you know, he's going to chair this.
committee to follow up the bonfire thing.
He was the associate dean when I came in here.
He's a good example of a person, of how I believe you need to fit the individual role to the organization.
Ryan could do so many things.
He helped me with budget.
He handled all the student affairs operations.
I had David David as associate dean for all the outreach.
working with the schools, student teaching.
And then I had Borman, who's now dean at University of Texas, San Antonio, as associate dean for graduate education.
And what happened was we were all co-deans.
The way I operated, I always believed that there ought to be two or more people that know about what's going on in the office so that you don't have to wait for somebody to get back.
If I was in Washington to a meeting or in the state or something.
My approach was that whatever came in, if it had something to do with graduate education or research, I'd send it to Borman.
If it had to do with outreach and field experience, I'd send it to David David.
If it had to do with budget or student affairs, I'd send it to Brian, and they would handle it.
If it had something to do with the department, I'd send it to the department.
And the team, I mean, what I appreciated most was the quality of the people that I had here.
And I've always believed that people have the ability to do more than they've been given a chance to do, unlike the Peter Principle.
I buy the Townsend notion, you know, the guy that wrote that book called Up the Organization.
where everybody's not operating at one level above their ability, but they're operating at a level where they haven't fully been able to utilize the potential.
And the job of leadership is to create the conditions to help them become better.
And none of the people that I work with ever failed me on that.
I mean, they just...
My big problem with some of these people was to try to keep saying, no, you can't do it all.
Brian would come in a certain week.
When we were going through some of these battles, he'd come in with his eyes all black and working all weekend and just burning himself out.
He's always been that way.
I keep telling him this now.
He's head of the department going through reorganization.
We're merging
human resources with Ed Edmund.
So he's doing all that, and then he takes on this other responsibility.
And the reason is he's probably the only one that can do it.
I mean, he can do it.
But the leadership's unbelievable.
How many people do you want to thank?
Well, I think that, you know, I've had great students, too.
I mean, my research associates, and they're all over the place now,
who just have helped me.
I've got a guy here now who's a former DA.
He got a law degree, and I've always had students, work-study students, who've been terrific.
A number of them were minority kids.
And they gave me a lot of help, too.
So it's hard to pick out any one person.
There's so many, so many people that, you know, I really felt were the ones that really were doing everything.
What are your favorite Aggie stories, Aggie experience stories?
It may be incredible, but they're true.
Well, a lot of these,
A lot of these stories that these guys, you know, these former students that I met were funny Aggie stories.
The Judge Stewart kind of story, you know, they're a little risky to tell.
I was hoping you might have had some experiences of working with an Aggie or being with Aggies that
some experiences that were... Well, not only to the extent that they're very loyal to the place.
I mean, they do anything for it.
I mean, when we started the Development Council, our problem wasn't getting people to be on it.
It was, you know, everybody wanted to be on it.
And they'd come to the meetings and...
My basic image of the place is that it's hard to explain it to anybody else.
When I would go to Dean's meetings, we'd have student NEA get together on a Wednesday night.
In the middle of the week, 450 kids show up.
You can't get students in some other place to come to meetings, because there's not a whole lot of other things to do here on a Wednesday night.
But here they're coming to very serious, preparing for their stand they're going to take on the next issue at the student NEA meeting, organizing SCONA activities like this.
Serious, but have a lot of fun, tremendously loyal to each other.
I think it's very hard to explain to other people.
Did any Aggie ever question your Texas accent?
I've had people who, and they're always very, they're not nasty about it or anything.
They just, like when I first came here, I was giving a speech I remember in McAllen.
And this little lady came up after her, and she says to me, what's that language you were speaking?
And she said, you sure do speak fast.
And I think it's been really interesting.
You know, I haven't, my accent, I still have this accent, this New England accent.
But people never really seem to bother.
Maybe they think I'm from a foreign country or something.
But they never held it against me, I don't think anyway.
I've never felt like I wasn't accepted.
All right, special moments that you cherish.
since you've been in the area?
Well, when I would say whenever we had
meetings, and they went well.
We came out of the sessions with a full set of ideas that we were going to implement next.
Times, you know, when we celebrated together, people, you know, supporting each other.
The whole experience that I had here as a dean was a very exciting, rewarding experience.
It was hard for me to move out of the deanship, but I knew I was ready.
Gardner and Bennis say about seven to ten years in the same spot, the same institution, is about long enough.
It's probably better that someone else comes in
And I knew I was ready.
One of the things that told me when I would go to those Dean's Council meetings, I'd look around, right, and they'd hand out the agenda, and the agenda item would be one that I'd seen three times before.
Maybe love is better the second time around, but those agenda items really do get
Were you the senior dean when you were teaching?
All but one person, I think, was... And you ceased deaning entirely on your own.
On my own, yeah.
Yeah, I was ready.
See, I'd been a dean for 23 years, and I loved to teach.
And the time I knew was...
some time left to really get engaged in some of these other activities.
I had been engaged in a lot of national activities and stuff, doing my own writing, which I was really interested in.
I've always done over the years.
And it seemed the time right.
Everything was going real good.
See, Mobley was president at the time, and I had good relationships with him.
He understood it when I went in to talk to him.
He didn't want me to do it, but he said, if you decide you don't want to be a dean anymore, that's fine.
I got another job for you.
Make believe that you are now, as of this moment, you are the outside consultant.
to advise Texas A&M for the future of the College of Education here.
What advice would you give?
Right.
The advice I'd give would be to help it define a few areas that they want to really make their market and to not to be using
the United States News and World Report criteria.
Because I've always believed that what you are is what you are at home, not what you are when you go to these national meetings with these other people.
That you make your reputation
by being good at what you do where you are.
And I think this place, as a state leader, as a land-grant institution, can be the greatest land-grant institution in the United States.
It won't be a great Princeton.
And so I think what it ought to do is take a look at what it's got.
Because you're not gonna hold a whole lot of money to hire totally new faculties to do a new thing.
You gotta have it go through an assessment of what it's got, what are the cutting-edge areas that Texas land-grant institution can make a mark doing, and through that, develop its national reputation.
not trying to mimic the so-called top ten.
Because the top ten aren't institutions that we want to or can compete against.
They have different missions, different people, different purposes.
And this place still has this
opportunity to release a whole lot of potential using the state itself.
And I worry it may have lost some of this with all of its attention to wanting to be like the top ten.
And I think that turns off certain leaders in the legislature.
that we ought to be the top institution because we're doing something that's unique to the setting that we're in.
And we've already got international connections, but we also have a state here that is unique.
And rather than looking outward for something to mimic,
You don't become great by mimicking anything.
You become great by becoming unique and distinctive with what you've got in the place you're at.
That's what I think, anyway.
All right, I've only got two more questions.
Let's make believe someone walks up and
pass it on to Texas A&M, but you get to decide how they use the money, what would it be for?
Well, I'd invest a lot in making the institution look more like the population of the state of Texas.
And that's one of the areas that if we're going to become distinctive, you can't have this gap between what the state looks like and what this institution looks like.
So what this means is you can't just change Texas A&M.
You have to make a commitment to change the whole educational system in the state of Texas.
So I would take, and a million wouldn't go a long way, I'd have to get more than a million.
I take an emphasis on starting with creating healthy human communities throughout the state and healthy educational systems and use the talent of the institution wherever it could be to do that.
to create jobs, to create training, to create good health conditions, and release the potential of the minority communities.
Poverty has a lot to do with what people are able to become.
I think we need to think outside of the traditional ways we think about education.
It's not thinking about families and healthy communities.
and invest a lot in community building.
Okay, last question.
What feelings do you hold in your heart today for Texas A&M?
Oh, this place is, you know, I stayed here for 20 years.
It became part of me.
You know, I'm as much of a, even though I went to school there, I'm as much of an Aggie now as everybody else.
The feelings I have, and a lot of it has to do with people, you know, I think that they're as much a part of me as anything.
You know, they're real family.
This place is unique in that regard.
You get real close to people on an intellectual level as well as personal level.
And I'm really proud of the people that, you know, I've helped.
developed to the extent that I have.
They treated me really well.
I had this chair.
I had a lot of opportunity to do these kinds of things, like this national commission that I serve on.
It's been great.